---
title: IEX, Broker Preferencing, and the Queue Jumpers
date: 2014-09-09
tags: market-structure
---

*This article [originally appeared online][1] at the [TABBForum][2] on
September 9, 2014.*

*IEX needs broker preferencing because of its business model – its non-broker
owners provide no client flow, and many electronic market makers see little
reason to be exposed to the high fee venue. But that doesn't make it right.*

You’ve arrived at the theater quite early. The reviews have been great, so you
anticipated a long line to get in, and your good planning has you in prime
position for great seats. As you suffer the cold drizzle, a limousine pulls up
and out steps a wealthy couple. Bemused, you watch as they are ushered straight
to the front of the line and taken into the theater before you. Your mood sours
quickly when you see an entire line of black town cars pulling in. Planning
ahead and leaving work early for an evening at the movies was an entire waste
of time.

This is broker preferencing – or, as it should be called, queue jumping. It’s a
terrible scenario for any trader taking on risk by posting passive orders to
the market. If we’re not careful, it might just slip into the US equities
markets under our nose.

Unlike movie theaters, the US stock market has well-defined rules for knowing
where you stand in the order queue. Whether it is a price/time or a price/size
pro-rata scheme, you can directly observe your queue position. Under a broker
preferencing regime, however, these rules are tossed aside, creating an
environment of uncertainty because your effective queue position will be
determined post-hoc based on counterparty. Knowing with certainty your true
place in the order queue will become impossible.

Chris Nagy of KOR Trading [recently wondered][3] what all the fuss was about (“What
Does IEX’s Exchange Application Mean for Market Structure?”). After all, the
SEC has permitted preferencing in the past, and it is the reality of the market
in Canada. But that doesn't make it right; especially for the current state of
US equities markets.

In fact, I wonder why we are even discussing broker preferencing. The issue
would be nowhere near the table of consideration if it weren’t for IEX and its
desire to bring along the rule to its lit exchange. Make no mistake about it:
IEX needs broker preferencing because of its business model. Its non-broker
owners provide no client flow, and many electronic market makers see little
reason to be exposed to the high fee venue.

Providing brokers a fast path to the top of the queue via a free
internalization service does nothing to improve the US equities markets
overall, and it certainly does not promote fairness in our markets. It merely
serves as one of the few levers that IEX can pull to attract order flow. For
all practical purposes, this creates a hidden, backdoor payment for order flow
system that is subsidized by passive traders at IEX, many of whom will have no
idea as to why their orders keep getting jumped. Yet another complexity that so
many have publicly vowed to eliminate.

IEX is free to do what it wants as a dark pool. As a lit exchange, however, its
business model needs are not sufficient reason to disrupt the accepted and
well-understood workings of priority in the US stock market. Broker
preferencing warrants careful study and debate before even being considered a
candidate issue for market structure reform. It should not be thrust upon us
simply because the market center du jour needs it to compete.

The SEC studied preferencing in the mid-90s and found it largely OK; but this
was before markets were dominated by displayed electronic liquidity with
numerous highly competitive liquidity providers. It was the day of the
specialist, and as the market evolved, it followed the specialist out the door
to take a seat next to the dodo, and rightly so. Presciently, the SEC study
cautions future dwellers against using the findings as justification for change
in the future:

> “While to date the Commission has found that these programs in aggregate do not
> appear to have had an adverse effect on either the executions received by
> customers whose orders are preferenced or the national market system as a
> whole, these findings should not be taken to mean that the Commission believes
> that such adverse effects may not arise in the future. Indeed, changed
> circumstances may result in a determination by the Commission that the findings
> it has made in this study require reconsideration.” (Emphasis mine.
> [Source](http://www.sec.gov/news/studies/prefrep.htm#pt6), final paragraph)

Circumstances have undoubtedly changed from when this report was published in
1997.

At best, preferencing is a wash that moves some amount of off-exchange
internalization onto lit venues in exchange for a more complicated and unfair
market place. It might also be very, very bad. Unanticipated harmful
consequences may spur a new tidal wave of regulatory-induced complexity
wreaking havoc for years to come.

One such risk that greatly concerns me is broker concentration. Because
preferencing permits queue jumping, there will be a benefit to concentrate
order flow with the largest brokers. Small brokers will be placed at an
inherent disadvantage that no amount of service or pricing can overcome. Their
customer’s passive orders will be systematically disadvantaged by those coming
from larger brokers able to side step the order book queue.

Electronic market makers will have less incentive to post and maintain better
prices because they know the reward for taking that risk will be subverted by
large brokers. In time, as power is concentrated, one wonders what other
perversions might be introduced as large brokers seek to protect their turf.
Orders that only match if internalized? Rules to protect “official” market
makers friendly to specific brokers? Consequences are largely unknown and
certainly have not been discussed. As a point of reference, who would have
thought the ban on locked markets would have caused the problems it has.

Regulatory evolution is important but should only be done if the potential
rewards outweigh the well-analyzed risks. Several reform areas – such as
permitting locked markets, instituting trade-at, and fixing the SIP – deserve
to receive the attention of the SEC much more so than the subversion of
priority that is broker preferencing. The worst kinds of regulations are those
done specifically to serve the aims of a small constituency, and in this case,
broker preferencing does everything to help IEX and nothing for the overall
marketplace.

[1]: http://tabbforum.com/opinions/iex-broker-preferencing-and-the-queue-jumpers
[2]: http://tabbforum.com
[3]: http://tabbforum.com/opinions/what-does-iex%27s-exchange-application-mean-for-market-structure
