---
title: It's Time to Distribute the SIP
date: 2014-10-27
tags: market-structure
---

**DRAFT**

*By distributing the SIP to the exchanges the US equities market structure
would become both more resilient to failure and achieve latency pairity with
direct venue feeds. This change embraces the distributed nature of our
marketplace and provides a distinct improvement upon the current scheme
without impinging upon the exchange's ability to provide innovative direct
data feed products.*

The US equities market place is comprised of numerous competitive displayed
and non-displayed liquidity centers. Each liquidity center that receives
quotation protection is known as an exchange and is required to provide, in
real-time, their quotations and trade activity to a centralized processor
known as a SIP.

Before we go any further let's make sure we're on the same page:

1. SIP stands for Security Information Processor. It is a construct created
   as part of the Regulation NMS reform tasked with providing a common and
   consistent view of the national market by aggregating data from each of the
   exchanges.

2. There are two SIPs. One, run by the [Consolidated Tape Association][cta]
   and administered by NYSE, handles securities listed on Tape A or Tape B.
   Tape A securities are listed on the NYSE and Tape B, traditionally known as
   the regionals, are listed on NYSE MKT (formerly known as the AMEX). The
   second SIP handles Tape C securities and is run by the [UTP][utp] (Unlisted
   Trading Privileges) Plan and administered by NASDAQ. As you might have
   guessed, it handles stocks that are listed on the NASDAQ market.

3. SIP market data feeds are broken down into two halves: trades and quotes.
   The CTA feeds (Tape A/B) are known as the Consolidated Quotation System
   (CQS) and the Consolidated Trade System (CTS). The UTP feeds (Tape C) are
   known as the the UTP Quote Data Feed (UQDF) and the UTP Trades Data Feed
   (UTDF).

4. Market data specifications for each feed are largely the same. They have
   the same scent, if you will, but they do differ enough as to require
   distinct handling of each flavor (CTA vs UTP) independently.

5. Hence forth, to avoid confusion and unnecessary plurality, I refer only to
   the "SIP". I am specifically referring to the construct inclussive of both
   administrative domains (CTA and UTP) and their two distinct types of
   market data (quotes via CQS/UQDF and trades via CTS/UTDF).

6. SIP market data falls into roughly three buckets: administrative,
   regulatory, and market activity. Administrative messages are not sensitive
   to real-time processing and include things like symbol spins. Real-time
   regulatory messages distribute information such as circuit breaker and
   volatility pause levels and are "somewhat" sensitive to real-time
   processing. Market activity messages include top of book quotations for
   each market center, a calculated national best bid and offer, and trade
   notifications. Market activity messages are what you see every day on your
   quote screens and are the most sensitive to real-time processing.

The SIP is a centralized construct with both an input side and an output side.
The input side is fed data via [TCP][tcp] and the output side distributed data
via [Multicast UDP][multicast]. This centralized architecture has two
intrinsic disadvantages:

1. SIP market data will **always** be slower than direct feeds; and

2. It as a single point of failure for the entire national market system.

The first point is obvious once you consider physics. SIP data must traverse
an additional "hop" before arriving at the end-user's system. SIP data will
always be behind direct feed data. This in-built disadvantage is further
compounded by neglect. SIP feeds represent competition for lucractive direct
exchange feeds and both the hardware and specifications are highly non-optimal
for speed. Efforts have been made to upgrade and improve the hardware, but in
the end the architecture must change to truly fix the SIP latency delta.

More troublesome, however, is the second point. The US equities market place
is distributed yet a failure in the SIP can bring the entire system to a
screeching halt. We saw this happen with Tape C when the UTP SIP failed bring
trading in all NASDAQ listed stock to an end for the better part of a day.

Finally, there is a third problem that arises from selective use of the SIP
feeds by exchanges that may be even more harmful than the two highlighted
above. Exchanges have certain obligations under the Reg-NMS regime that
requires them to aggregate quotes from across market centers. To do this, the
vast majority of venues take direct feeds from each of the other protected
quote venues. They take direct feeds because direct feeds are fastest, but
they also sometimes mix their use of direct feeds with SIP feeds as was
highlighted when IEX challenged former Direct Edge CEO Bill O'Brien.

Why would they take both?  By taking SIP feeds and using them for pricing
exchange held pegged orders (midpoints, for example) an ever so slight
advantage can be given to fast market participants when taking liquidity
during level transitions. This issue, to be honest, has a very small practical
impact on pegged orders. More pressing and harmful is the negative impact it
has on the perception of our market place as being unfair and dishonest.

How do we solve these problems? All three issues can be put to rest in one
fell swoop: simply distribute the SIP.

### A Distributed SIP

[utp]: http://www.utpplan.com
[cta]: http://cta.nyxdata.com/CTA 
[tcp]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol
[multicast]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multicast
